1 General Information: README
*****************************

This is the README file for the distribution of ESS version

   5.11

   ESS is a GNU Emacs and XEmacs mode for interactive statistical
programming and data analysis.  Languages supported: the S family (S,
S-PLUS and R), SAS, BUGS/JAGS, Stata and XLispStat.  ESS grew out of the
desire for bug fixes and extensions to S-mode and SAS-mode as well as a
consistent union of their features in one package.

   Installation instructions are provided in sections for both Unix and
Windows; see below.

   The current development team is led by Martin Maechler since August
2004. Former project leader A.J. (Tony) Rossini
(<rossini@blindglobe.net>) did the initial port to XEmacs and has been
the primary coder.  Martin Maechler (<maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch>) and
Kurt Hornik (<Kurt.Hornik@R-project.org>) have assisted with the S
family and XLispStat.  Stephen Eglen (<stephen@gnu.org>) has worked
mostly on R support.  Richard M. Heiberger (<rmh@temple.edu>) has
assisted with S/S-PLUS development for Windows.  Richard and Rodney A.
Sparapani (<rsparapa@mcw.edu>) have done much of the work improving SAS
batch and interactive support.  Rodney has also extended ESS to support
BUGS/JAGS and has an interest in improving Stata support.

   We are grateful to the previous developers of S-mode (Doug Bates, Ed
Kademan, Frank Ritter, David M. Smith), SAS-mode (Tom Cook) and
Stata-mode (Thomas Lumley).

   Table of Contents

   * License

   * Stability

   * Requirements

   * Latest Version

   * Installation

   * Starting an ESS Process

   * New Features

   * Current Features

   * Reporting Bugs

   * Mailing Lists

   * Authors

1.1 License
===========

ESS is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
version.

   ESS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
in the file COPYING in the same directory as this file for more details.

1.2 Stability
=============

All released versions (5.x, x >= 4) are meant to be release-quality
versions.  While some new features are being introduced, we are
cleaning up and improving the interface.  We know about some remaining
documentation inconsistencies.  Patches or suggested fixes with bug
reports are much appreciated!

1.3 Requirements
================

ESS is most likely to work with current/recent versions of the following
statistical packages: R/S-PLUS, SAS, Stata and JAGS. The one exception
is BUGS which is quite old, but should still work.

   ESS supports current/recent versions of GNU Emacs and XEmacs.  Most
notably, the GNU Emacs 22 series and XEmacs 21.4.14 or higher
(beta/pre-release versions are NOT SUPPORTED).

1.4 Getting the Latest Version
==============================

The latest released version of ESS is always available on the web at:
ESS web page (http://ess.r-project.org) or StatLib
(http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/general/ESS/)

   The latest development version of ESS is available via
`https://svn.R-project.org/ESS/', the ESS Subversion repository.  If
you have a Subversion client (see `http://subversion.tigris.org/'), you
can download the sources using:
     % svn checkout https://svn.r-project.org/ESS/trunk PATH
   which will put the ESS files into directory PATH.  Later, within
that directory, `svn update' will bring that directory up to date.
Windows-based tools such as TortoiseSVN are also available for
downloading the files.  Alternatively, you can browse the sources with a
web browser at: ESS SVN site (https://svn.r-project.org/ESS/trunk).
However, please use a subversion client instead to minimize the load
when retrieving.

   If you remove other versions of ESS from your emacs load-path, you
can then use the development version by adding the following to .emacs:

     (load "/path/to/ess-svn/lisp/ess-site.el")

   Note that https is required, and that the SSL certificate for the
Subversion server of the R project is

     Certificate information:
      - Hostname: svn.r-project.org
      - Valid: from Jul 16 08:10:01 2004 GMT until Jul 14 08:10:01 2014 GMT
      - Issuer: Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, CH
      - Fingerprint: c9:5d:eb:f9:f2:56:d1:04:ba:44:61:f8:64:6b:d9:33:3f:93:6e:ad

(currently, there is no "trusted certificate").  You can accept this
certificate permanently and will not be asked about it anymore.

1.5 Installation
================

1.6 Unix installation
=====================

For a Unix or Unix-like installation, please follow the next steps.
Retrieve the latest tgz file (`ess-VERSION.tgz') from ESS downloads
area (http://ess.r-project.org/index.php?Section=download).

   _GNU Emacs Simple Instructions:_ for recent versions of Emacs (22.x
or higher) and ESS, the installation process is simple.

  1. Extract all the files from `ess-VERSION.tgz' when you are in the
     current working directory of `/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp'
     which exists for packages like ESS (and for Mac OS X create a link
     to it from the directory
     `/Applications/Emacs.app/Contents/Resources/site-lisp'):
          %prompt gtar zxf ess-VERSION.tgz            # for GNU tar
          %prompt gunzip < ess-VERSION.tgz | tar xf - # for Unix tar

  2. Then, add the line
          (require 'ess-site)
     to `~/.emacs' and restart Emacs.

  3. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the simple instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then read further.

  4. It could be that you have an older version of Emacs, some other
     problem with your installation or you are not a sysadmin.
     Whatever the case, you may need to edit `ess-site.el' manually.
     If that is the case, then you should create a directory just for
     ESS like `~/ess' or `/usr/local/ess' and unpack ESS there.  That
     way, your changes to `ess-site.el' will not be lost if you update
     Emacs later.

  5. Replace the line above with
          (load "~/ess/ess-VERSION/lisp/ess-site")
     in `~/.emacs' and restart Emacs.

  6. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the manual instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then send a query to
     <ess-help@stat.math.ethz.ch> explicitly describing your problem
     and your environment including operating system, Emacs version,
     ESS version, etc.

   _XEmacs Simple Instructions:_ for recent versions of XEmacs (21.x or
higher) and ESS, the installation process is simple.

  1. Extract all the files from `ess-VERSION.tgz' when you are in the
     current working directory of
     `/usr/local/LOCATION/xemacs/site-packages' which exists for
     packages like ESS where `LOCATION' is `lib' for legacy
     installations and `share' now (and for Mac OS X create a link to
     it from the directory
     `/Applications/XEmacs.app/Contents/Resources/site-lisp'):
          %prompt gtar zxf ess-VERSION.tgz            # for GNU tar
          %prompt gunzip < ess-VERSION.tgz | tar xf - # for Unix tar

  2. Then, add the line
          (require 'ess-site)
     to `~/.xemacs/init.el' and restart XEmacs.

  3. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the simple instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then read further.

  4. It could be that you have an older version of XEmacs, some other
     problem with your installation or you are not a sysadmin.
     Whatever the case, you may need to edit `ess-site.el' manually.
     If that is the case, then you should create a directory just for
     ESS like `~/ess' or `/usr/local/ess' and unpack ESS there.  That
     way, your changes to `ess-site.el' will not be lost if you update
     XEmacs later.

  5. Replace the line above with
          (load "~/ess/ess-VERSION/lisp/ess-site")
     in `~/.xemacs/init.el' and restart XEmacs.

  6. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the manual instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then send a query to
     <ess-help@stat.math.ethz.ch> explicitly describing your problem
     and your environment including operating system, XEmacs version,
     ESS version, etc.

  1. (OPTIONAL) COMPILING E-LISP:

     Edit the default locations of `LISPDIR', `INFODIR' and `ETCDIR' in
     Section 1 of `Makeconf' (if you are using XEmacs, then edit the
     XEmacs subsection in Section 1).

     You can compile those files by:
          make all

     When that completes successfully, install the compiled files:
          make install


1.7 Microsoft Windows installation
==================================

For Microsoft Windows installation, please follow the next steps.
Retrieve the latest zip file (`ess-VERSION.zip') from ESS downloads
area (http://ess.r-project.org/index.php?Section=download).

   _GNU Emacs Simple Instructions:_ for recent versions of Emacs (22.x
or higher) and ESS, the installation process is simple.

  1. Extract all the files from `ess-VERSION.zip' (by double clicking
     on it and selecting "Extract all files" which launches the Folders
     Extraction Wizard) into the `site-lisp' directory that exists for
     packages like ESS.  If GNU Emacs was installed in the default
     location, then this directory can be found somewhere like
     `C:\Program Files\GNU Emacs\emacs-22.x\site-lisp'.

  2. Add the line
          (require 'ess-site)
     to `~/.emacs' and restart Emacs.

  3. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the simple instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then read further.

  4. It could be you have an older version of Emacs or some other
     problem with your installation.  Either way, you may need to edit
     `C:\ess\ess-VERSION\lisp\ess-site.el' manually.  If that is the
     case, then you should create a directory just for ESS like
     `C:\ess' and unpack ESS there.  That way, your changes to
     `C:\ess\ess-VERSION\lisp\ess-site.el' will not be lost if you
     update Emacs later.

  5. Replace the line above with
          (load "C:/ess/ess-VERSION/lisp/ess-site")
     in `~/.emacs' and restart Emacs.

  6. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the manual instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then send a query to
     <ess-help@stat.math.ethz.ch> explicitly describing your problem
     and your environment including operating system, Emacs version,
     ESS version, etc.

   _XEmacs Simple Instructions:_ for recent versions of XEmacs (21.x or
higher), the installation process is much simpler.  Hopefully, these
simple instructions will work for you.  If not, then more detailed,
manual instructions follow.

  1. Extract all the files from `ess-VERSION.zip' (by double clicking
     on it and selecting "Extract all files" which launches the Folders
     Extraction Wizard) into the `site-packages' directory that exists
     for packages like ESS.  If XEmacs was installed in the default
     location, then this directory can be found at `C:\Program
     Files\XEmacs\site-packages'.

  2. XEmacs requires the `HOME' environment variable to be defined.
     You can create it by visiting the following dialog: `My
     Computer->Control Panel->System->Advanced->Environment Variables'
     In the User variables window, press New.  And create a variable
     named `HOME' with a value something like (you must use forward
     slashes `/' rather than backslashes `\') `c:/Documents and
     Settings/%USERNAME%/Application Data'.  Then press OK for that
     window and press OK for the main window.  _If you also have GNU
     Emacs installed, GNU Emacs will recognize `HOME' and expand `~'
     accordingly._

  3. Now launch XEmacs and do a `C-x C-f' followed by a `~'.  From the
     Subdir menu, select Create Directory, and enter `.xemacs'

  4. Add the line
          (require 'ess-site)
     to `~/.xemacs/init.el' and restart XEmacs.

  5. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the simple instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then read further.

  6. It could be you have an older version of XEmacs or some other
     problem with your installation.  Either way, you may need to edit
     `C:\ess\ess-VERSION\lisp\ess-site.el' manually.  If that is the
     case, then you should create a directory just for ESS like
     `C:\ess' and unpack ESS there.  That way, your changes to
     `C:\ess\ess-VERSION\lisp\ess-site.el' will not be lost if you
     update XEmacs later.

  7. Replace the line above with
          (load "C:/ess/ess-VERSION/lisp/ess-site")
     in `~/.xemacs/init.el' and restart XEmacs.

  8. If you see a buffer named `*ESS*', then the manual instructions
     were most likely successful.  If not, then send a query to
     <ess-help@stat.math.ethz.ch> explicitly describing your problem
     and your environment including operating system, XEmacs version,
     ESS version, etc.

   Now, you should be ready to use ESS.  For example, to edit
statistical programs, load the files with the requisite extensions
(".sas" for SAS, ".S" or "s" or "q" or "Q" for S-PLUS, ".r" or ".R" for
R, and ".lsp" for XLispStat).  One further step is needed if you wish to
run statistical processes, see below.

   To run statistical processes under ESS, Windows users will need to
make sure that the directories for the software they will be using is
in the PATH environment variable.

   On Windows NT/2000/XP, add the directories to the PATH using the `My
Computer->Control Panel->System->Advanced->Environment Variables' menu.
Note that the directory containing the program is added to the PATH,
not the program itself.  One such line is needed for each software
program.  Be sure to use the abbreviation `progra~1' and not the long
version with embedded blanks as this may cause problems.  Also, make
sure to use backslashes `\' since Windows requires them.

   An alternative, for R users, is that rather than adjusting the PATH
variable, you can add the following to your emacs initialization file
(and restart emacs):
     (setq inferior-R-program-name "c:/progra~1/R/R-2.2.1/bin/Rterm.exe")
   This assumes that you have installed R-2.2.1 in the default location.
Change the path otherwise to point to other locations.

   Windows users who place S-PLUS anywhere other than the default
location will also need to add the following three lines (properly
adjusted for their location):
     (setq-default inferior-S+6-program-name
         "c:/progra~1/Insightful/SPLUS70/cmd/Splus")
     (setq-default inferior-Sqpe+6-SHOME-name
         "c:/progra~1/Insightful/SPLUS70")
     (setq-default inferior-Sqpe+6-program-name
         "c:/progra~1/Insightful/SPLUS70/cmd/Sqpe.exe")
   The above example uses the default location of S-PLUS in
`c:\progra~1\Insightful'.  Please note that ESS considers S-PLUS 6, 7,
and 8 to be variants of S+6.

   These users may also need to modify the emacs variable
`ess-SHOME-versions' to match their installation in order to get the
full set of S-PLUS versions on their machine into the ESS menu.

   To start the S-PLUS [678].x GUI from ESS under emacs:
  1. If you use Cygwin bash as your primary shell, then
          M-x S
          (or `M-x S+6').

  2. If you use the MSDOS prompt window as your primary shell, then
          M-x S+6-msdos
     You will then be asked for a pathname ("S starting data
directory?"), from which to start the process.  The prompt will propose
your current directory as the default.  ESS will start the S-PLUS GUI.
There will be slight delay during which emacs is temporarily frozen.
ESS will arrange for communication with the S-PLUS GUI using the DDE
protocol.  Send lines or regions from the emacs buffer containing your
S program (for example, `myfile.s') to the S-PLUS Commands Window with
the `C-c C-n' or `C-c C-r' keys.  (If you are still using S-PLUS 4.x or
2000,\ then use `M-x S+4' or `M-x S+4-msdos'.)

   To start an S-PLUS [678].x session inside an emacs buffer--and
without the S-PLUS GUI:
     M-x Sqpe
     (or `M-x Sqpe+6').
   This works with both the bash and msdos shells.  You will then be
asked for a pathname ("S starting data directory?"), from which to
start the process.  The prompt will propose your current directory as
the default.  You get Unix-like behavior, in particular the entire
transcript is available for emacs-style search commands.  Send lines or
regions from the emacs buffer containing your S program (for example,
`myfile.s') to the *S+6* buffer with the `C-c C-n' or `C-c C-r' keys.
Interactive graphics are available with Sqpe by using the java library
supplied with S-PLUS 6.1 and newer releases.  Enter the commands:
     library(winjava)
     java.graph()
   Graphs can be saved from the `java.graph' device in several formats,
but not PostScript.   If you need a PostScript file you will need to
open a separate `postscript' device.  (If you are still using S-PLUS
4.x or 2000, then use `M-x Sqpe+4'.)

   To connect to an already running S-PLUS GUI (started, for example,
from the S-PLUS icon):
     M-x S+6-existing
   or
     M-x S+6-msdos-existing
   You will then be asked for a pathname ("S starting data
directory?"), from which to start the process.  The prompt will propose
your current directory as the default.  ESS will arrange for
communication with the already running S-PLUS GUI using the DDE
protocol.  Send lines or regions from the emacs buffer containing your
S program (for example, `myfile.s') to the S-PLUS Commands Window with
the `C-c C-n' or `C-c C-r' keys.  (If you are still using S-PLUS 4.x or
2000,  then use `M-x S+4-existing' or `M-x S+4-msdos-existing'.)

   If you wish to run R, you can start it with:
     M-x R

   XLispStat can not currently be run with
     M-x XLS
   Hopefully, this will change.  However, you can still edit with
emacs, and cut and paste the results into the XLispStat *Listener*
Window under Microsoft Windows.

1.8 Starting an ESS process
===========================

To start an S session on Unix or on Windows when you use the Cygwin
bash shell, simply type `M-x S RET'.

   To start an S session on Windows when you use the MSDOS prompt
shell, simply type `M-x S+6-msdos RET'.

1.9 Current Features
====================

   * Languages Supported:
        * S family (S 3/4, S-PLUS 3.x/4.x/5.x/6.x/7.x/8.x, and R)

        * SAS

        * BUGS/JAGS

        * Stata

        * XLispStat including Arc and ViSta

   * Editing source code (S family, SAS, BUGS/JAGS, XLispStat)
        * Syntactic indentation and highlighting of source code

        * Partial evaluation of code

        * Loading and error-checking of code

        * Source code revision maintenance

        * Batch execution (SAS, BUGS/JAGS)

        * Use of imenu to provide links to appropriate functions

   * Interacting with the process (S family, SAS, XLispStat)
        * Command-line editing

        * Searchable Command history

        * Command-line completion of S family object names and file
          names

        * Quick access to object lists and search lists

        * Transcript recording

        * Interface to the help system

   * Transcript manipulation (S family, XLispStat)
        * Recording and saving transcript files

        * Manipulating and editing saved transcripts

        * Re-evaluating commands from transcript files

   * Help File Editing (R)
        * Syntactic indentation and highlighting of source code.

        * Sending Examples to running ESS process.

        * Previewing

1.10 New Features
=================

     Changes/New Features in 5.11:
        * Filename completion within buffers now adds only trailing
          characters to complete the filename, rather than expanding to
          an absolute file path.  This filename completion is bound to
          the TAB key.

        * `M-n P' in Sweave buffers now prompts for the command to run
          instead of using `pdflatex' unconditionally, offering
          completion from customizable collection
          `ess-swv-pdflatex-commands', the first of which is taken as
          default and that defaults to `texi2pdf'.

        * `M-RET' is now also bound in S language (R and S+) buffers to
          `ess-use-this-dir'. It sends `setwd(..)' to the S process to
          set the working directory to the one of the source file.

     Changes/New Features in 5.10:
        * `M-RET' in *S* buffers is now bound to `ess-dirs'.  This
          function will set Emacs's current directory to be the same as
          the *S* process.  This is useful if you use `setwd()' within
          a *S* process.

     Changes/New Features in 5.9:
        * Toolbar:  The toolbar now has an icon for starting Splus.

        * Indentation: New documentation and code has been added to
          make it easier to change how ESS indents code.  In
          particular, see `ess-default-style', `ess-own-style-list' and
          the documention subsection "Changing indentation styles".

        * `ess-display-help-on-object' (`C-c C-v') now offers
          completion candidates for help file aliases, in addition to
          object  names.

        * Font locking: is now turned on  even without `window-system'
          is `nil', whenever  ESS-FONT-LOCK-MODE is non-nil, i.e., by
          default.

        * ESS script editing: ess-eval-deactivate-mark default is now t,
          as suggested by Leo Alekseyev and subsequent "unanimous"
          ESS-help  discussion.

        * ESS[R]: Editing support for "#!" (Rscript / littler) editing,
          thanks to Jeffrey Arnold.

        * ESS[R]: Now finds all R versions, both 64-bit and 32-bit, on
          some  64-bit Windows machines.  Please report back to
          ess-core success or failure  on your 64-bit Windows machine.

        * ESS Manual now more visually pleasing;
          `http://ess.r-project.org/Manual/ess.html'

        * ESS[R]: Roxygen on XEmacs no longer font locks for now  (as
          it required missing features and hence broke ESS startup,
          there).

        * ESS[R]: Roxygen has a sub-menu on the [ESS] menu.

        * ESS[R]: Function `ess-rutils-htmldocs' in  `ess-rutils.el'
          offers an alternative to `help.start()' for  navigating R
          documentation, using the `browse-url' Emacs  function.

     Changes/New Features in 5.8:
        * ESS[R]: New `ess-rutils.el' with utilities for listing,
          loading, installing, and updating packages, as well as object
          manipulation (listing, viewing, and deleting).  It also
          provides an alternative to `RSiteSearch()' that uses the
          `browse-url' function, so results can be viewed in an Emacs
          web browser.

        * ESS[R]: much more extensive Roxygen interface, via ess-roxy.el
          from Henning Redestig. Ess-roxy supports filling of roxygen
          fields,  generation and updating roxygen templates,
          completion of roxygen tags,  basic navigation (marking and
          moving between entries), folding using  hs-minor-mode and
          preview of the Rd file.

        * Emacs lisp files have got better names (partly, for now).

     Changes/New Features in 5.7:
        * ESS[R]: loading a source file (`C-c C-l') now works in
          Windows, similarly to other platforms;  (further; it had
          accidentally been broken in ESS 5.6 on all platforms)

     Changes/New Features in 5.6:
        * ESS[R]: help() calls have to differ from old default, with
          newer  versions of R; currently via .help.ESS <-
          function(...) hack.

     Changes/New Features in 5.4:
        * ESS[SAS]: The long overdue change from `make-regexp' to
          `regexp-opt' for font-locking is complete.  The new
          `regexp-opt' is now the default since it is better than the
          old code in many ways (and especially more maintainable).
          However, there are certainly some special cases missed (bug
          reports and patches welcome!).  Setting
          `ess-sas-run-regexp-opt' to `nil' will result in the old code
          being used.

        * ESS[BUGS] and ESS[JAGS]: typing `=' now results in  `<-'.

        * ESS[R] function arguments "show" `(ess-r-args-show)' now
          uses the new `(tooltip-show-at-point)' contributed by Erik
          Iverson.

        * Toolbar icons now also work in (beta) Emacs 23.

        * ESS[S]: New function `ess-change-directory' for setting both
          emacs' current directory and the directory of an *R* or *S*
          buffer.

        * ESS[S] when transient-mark-mode is true, the mark is now kept,
          rather than deactivated, thanks to a patch from David Reitter.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.11:
        * ESS[SAS]: work around bug in Emacs 22.2 & 22.3 which fails to
          set case-fold fontification automatically.

        * Rd mode: support new keyword 'Rdversion'

        * ESS[R]: now again works with Emacs 21.x

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.10:
        * Fixed noweb-mode bug accidentally introduced into 5.3.9

        * In noweb-mode, e.g., Rnw-mode, electric "<" also inserts
          closing "@".   Further, the code chunk boundaries are better
          kept up-to-date, such that  code[R] <-> text[LaTeX] minor
          mode switching should happen more reliably.

        * In noweb-mode, fix a buglet in rare [Enter] or [Tab]
          behavior; further,  by default disable the former `[[' ..
          `]]'  code-protection-when-filling  behavior which has been
          found to be buggy.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.9:
        * ESS[SAS]: evince PDF viewer now supported as well; search
          order: evince, Xpdf, Adobe/Acrobat Reader

        * ESS[R]: added support for Roxygen, potentially to be extended.

        * ESS[S] (and R): inferior (`*R*') and transcript modes no
          longer fontify language keywords (such as `for', `in', etc).

        * iESS[Stata]: Customize the `ess-sta-delimiter-friendly'
          setting to `t' to convert embedded semi-colons to newlines
          for Stata processing.

        * Sweave fix for embedded blanks in PDF reader and PDF files

        * Several fixes for Major Mode Convention violations in
          `ess-mode' and `noweb-mode'.

        * ESS[JAGS]: `M-x comment-region' now available!

        * ESS[S] The `ess-swv-*' commands (and keybindings) are now in
          a submenu of the "Noweb" menu, when editing Sweave files.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.8:
        * ESS[JAGS]: more separation from ESS[BUGS] (as much as is
          currently planned); now `C-c C-c' on an empty `.jmd' creates
          a template as it should; symbolic links are created for CODA
          output so BOA is happy: from `index.txt' to `.ind' and
          `chain#.txt' to `#.out'

        * ESS[SAS]: buffer-local `ess-sas-submit-command' and
          `ess-sas-submit-command-options' now recognized by
          `ess-sas-submit-region'

        * ESS[S]: When trying to evaluate code in an S language buffer
          and  there is no associated process, now start R
          automatically instead of  signalling an error.  Also, restart
          R if there is an associated process  which is not running.
          However, do not start R just via the "electric"  `('
          (`ess-r-args-auto-show').

        * ESS[S]: For (one-line) functions withOUT '{ .. }' bodys, the
          end  of function is now correctly found more often.  This
          notably improves  `C-c C-c'
          (`ess-eval-function-or-paragraph-and-step').

        * ESS[JAGS]: cleanup/re-organization of elisp code; symbolic
          links for CODA output are now only created by the new JAGS
          `system' command in version 1.0.3; specify whether this
          command is available via `ess-jags-system'; if not present,
          then no links are created so that the `*shell*' buffer does
          not become unresponsive during the batch run

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.7:
        * ESS: `ess-default-style' now *is* customizable, i.e.,
          changing its value in `~/.emacs' now does have the desired
          effect.

        * ESS: `ess-font-lock-mode' is a new variable (default: t)
          which controls whether font-locking is enabled in ESS buffers.

        * ESS[R]: for XEmacs on Windows; another tweak to find R
          versions

        * ESS[SAS]: font-locking updated for ODS and SAS Bayesian
          Procedures; a more consistent handling of SAS options by
          `ess-sas-submit-command-options' which is buffer-local;
          portable snooze for MS Windows via customize-able
          `ess-sleep-for' (floats welcome); Xpdf now supported as a PDF
          viewer

        * ESS[Rnw]: now also works with "emacs -nw" and Emacs 22.

        * ESS[JAGS]: now requires JAGS 1.0 (see the new ESS for JAGS
          help section for more information): both need work;
          suggestions welcome

        * ESS[R]: [TAB] completion now uses the R-internal completion
          mechanism (for R >= 2.5.0).

        * ESS[R] ([S]): interpretation of "_" as assignment has been
          removed in `ess-continued-statement-p' for R and S.

        * several internal code cleanups.

        * ESS[R]: An experimental version of a new command `Rgui' on MS
          Windows to send lines directly from emacs to `Rgui' is
          available in file `lisp/essd-rgui.el'.  Preliminary
          documentation is in file `doc/rgui-doc.txt'.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.6:
        * ESS: for XEmacs, using "gnuclient" (without a "-q") works for
          things like fix() after M-x gnuserv-start has been done.

        * ESS[R]: M-x R-newest should now work in more situations on MS
          Windows, e.g., when R has been installed in a non-default
          "ProgramFiles"  directory tree.  In these cases, there's no
          need to specify the name (and  full path) of the R program
          anymore.

        * ESS[R]: For XEmacs, startup (with new tooltip code) works
          again.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.5:
        * ESS[R] a new defun is available, `M-x R-newest', which will
          start the newest version of R that it can find on your system.

        * ESS[R] add Sven Hartenstein's "R function arguments tips"
          functionality, via new file `../lisp/essd-r-args.el'.   Note
          that this includes an "electric "("" behavior inside `R-mode'
          which is _active by default_ and can be customized via
          `ess-r-args-electric-paren'; i.e., use `(setq
          ess-r-args-electric-paren nil)' to turn it off.  Further,
          `ess-r-args-show-as' allows to switch to the "tooltip" mode.

        * ESS: functions `ess-get-pdf-viewer' and *-ps-viewer; built on
          new  customizable variables `ess-pdf-viewer-pref' and
          `ess-ps-viewer-pref'; currently used in `ess-swv-PDF' and
          `*-PS'.

        * ESS[R] Improved `ess-swv-PDF' to run pdf viewer only if
          pdflatex was ok

        * ESS[R] Improved `ess-swv-weave' to start R automatically if
          none is running.

        * ESS: Do no longer ask _which_ ESS process to use if there  is
          only one.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.4:
        * ESS[R] now better work with options(error=recover); and the
          new default of CHM help files on windows.

        * ESS[R] some more cleanup in the "sweave" functions

        * miscellaneous fixes

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.3:
        * ESS[S] fix buglet (5.3.2 only) which left command prompt in
          "execute buffer" and hence help files.

        * new customizable variable `ess-display-buffer-reuse-frames'
          set to true (which changes default behavior) such that
          execution or help *frames* are reused.

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.2:
        * Classic BUGS now supported by `(require 'essd-bugs)' with
          ESS[BUGS]       and JAGS by `(require 'essd-jags)' with
          ESS[JAGS].  But, only one       of them can be used at a time
          since they don't play nice together.  Also,       `C-c C-c'
          is now bound to the function `ess-bugs-next-action'
          (`F12' has been retired).  And finally, note that
          `essl-bug.el'       is deprecated and the replacement is
          `essl-bugs.el'.

        * ESS[R] Improved some of the "Sweave-make"  functions (yet
          scarcely documented) in `ess-swv.el'.

        * ESS[S] No longer mess with .Last.value (nor in other
          "languages").

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.1:
        * See the docs for 2 ways to install ESS for XEmacs
            1. by uncommenting the XEmacs part of             Section 1
               of `Makeconf' and performing `make install'

            2. by unpacking either             `ess-5.3.1.tgz' or
               `ess-5.3.1.zip' into
               `PREFIX/lib/xemacs/site-packages' on unix or
               `PREFIX\XEmacs\site-packages' on windows

        * ESS[R]: fixed bugs so that Rterm.exe can be found by XEmacs

        * ESS[S]: `ess-toggle-S-assign-key' is slightly changed; in
          particular, the default `ess-assign-key' is now `C-x ='.

        * ESS[R]: `M-x R-site-search' is a new (slightly experimental)
          utility similar to R's `RSiteSearch(..)' but with the
          advantage of  using Emacs' preferred browser, see
          `browse-url-browser-function'

     Changes/New Features in 5.3.0:
        * ESS[BUGS]: sanely re-format statistical output, `.bog', from
          scientific notation to numbers rounded with 4 decimal places
          with `M-x ess-bugs-sci-round-to-4-dp'.

        * The keys for navigating among section headings in help buffers
          worked, but only for one language per session; they should
          now work for multiple languages.  (They were also broken on
          Windows machines.)

        * ESS[S] long standing buglets in the internal logic for loading
          lisp code on Windows.  Particularly fixed behavior in help
          mode with S-plus GUI.

        * New variable, `ess-use-inferior-program-name-in-buffer-name',
          which enables using the executable name instead of the
          dialect name for R. Feature request.

        * ESS[S] `ess-execute-screen-options' now also works correctly
          when there is more than one window *side-by-side* in the same
          frame and runs in the correct buffer also when there is more
          than one S buffer.

        * iESS[S] new functions `ess-eval-paragraph-and-step' and
          `ess-eval-function-or-paragraph-and-step' are bound to keys
          `C-c C-p' and `C-c C-c' respectively and to the menu in
          ESS-mode; also bound in the help mode (for evaluating
          examples).

        * ESS[S] new function `ess-toggle-S-assign-key' allows to
          assign the " <- " insertion to an arbitrary key.


1.11 Reporting Bugs
===================

Please send bug reports, suggestions etc. to
<ESS-bugs@stat.math.ethz.ch>

   The easiest way to do this is within Emacs by typing

   `M-x ess-submit-bug-report'

   This also gives the maintainers valuable information about your
installation which may help us to identify or even fix the bug.

   If Emacs reports an error, backtraces can help us debug the problem.
Type "M-x set-variable RET debug-on-error RET t RET".  Then run the
command that causes the error and you should see a *Backtrace* buffer
containing debug information; send us that buffer.

   Note that comments, suggestions, words of praise and large cash
donations are also more than welcome.

1.12 Mailing Lists
==================

There is a mailing list for discussions and announcements relating to
ESS.  Join the list by sending an e-mail with "subscribe ess-help" (or
"help") in the body to <ess-help-request@stat.math.ethz.ch>;
contributions to the list may be mailed to
<ess-help@stat.math.ethz.ch>.  Rest assured, this is a fairly
low-volume mailing list.

   The purposes of the mailing list include

   *  helping users of ESS to get along with it.

   *  discussing aspects of using ESS on Emacs and XEmacs.

   *  suggestions for improvements.

   *  announcements of new releases of ESS.

   *  posting small patches to ESS.

1.13 Authors
============

   * A.J. Rossini (mailto:blindglobe@gmail.com)

   * Richard M. Heiberger (mailto:rmh@temple.edu)

   * Kurt Hornik (mailto:Kurt.Hornik@R-project.org)

   * Martin Maechler (mailto:maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch)

   * Rodney A. Sparapani (mailto:rsparapa@mcw.edu)

   * Stephen Eglen (mailto:stephen@gnu.org)

   * Sebastian P. Luque (mailto:spluque@gmail.com)

   * Henning Redestig (mailto:henning.red@googlemail.com)

